Work in Progress

S HANKS : S IMULTANEOUS H EARING AND T HINKING
FOR S POKEN L ANGUAGE M ODELS
Cheng-Han Chiang1,2∗ Xiaofei Wang2† Linjie Li2 Chung-Ching Lin2 Kevin Lin2
Shujie Liu2 Zhendong Wang2 Zhengyuan Yang2 Hung-yi Lee1 Lijuan Wang2
1

National Taiwan University

2

Microsoft

arXiv:2510.06917v2 [cs.CL] 18 Oct 2025

A BSTRACT
Current large language models (LLMs) and spoken language models (SLMs) begin
thinking and taking actions only after the user has finished their turn. This disables
the model from interacting with the user during the user’s turn and can lead to a
high response latency for waiting for the model to think. Consequently, thinking
after receiving the full input is not suitable for speech-to-speech interaction, where
real-time and low-latency interaction is important. We address the above issue by
drawing inspiration from the fact that humans can naturally “think while listening”.
In this paper, we propose S HANKS, a general inference framework that enables
SLMs to generate unspoken chain-of-thought reasoning when listening to the user
input. S HANKS streams the input speech in fixed-duration chunks and, as soon as a
chunk is received, generates unspoken reasoning based on all previous speech and
reasoning, while the user continues speaking. S HANKS uses unspoken reasoning
to determine whether to interrupt the user and make tool calls to complete the
task. We demonstrate that S HANKS enhances the real-time user-SLM interaction
in two scenarios: (1) When the user is presenting their step-by-step solution to
a math problem, S HANKS can listen to and reason over the user’s speech and
make an interruption when the user makes a mistake. S HANKS interrupts the
user 37.1% more accurately compared with a baseline that interrupts the user
without thinking. (2) In a tool-augmented dialogue scenario, where the model
needs to make tool calls to achieve the user’s request, S HANKS can complete
56.9% of the tool calls before the user even ends their turn. Overall, S HANKS
is a step toward models that keep thinking throughout the conversation, not only
after a turn ends. Animated illustrations of S HANKS can be found at https:
//d223302.github.io/SHANKS/.

1

I NTRODUCTION

In recent years, the thinking process has been used to improve Large Language Models (LLMs),
where the LLM first generates a hidden chain-of-thought (CoT) reasoning (Wei et al., 2022; Kojima
et al., 2022) invisible to the users, and then generates the final output response (OpenAI, 2024c;
Guo et al., 2025). This thinking process improves LLMs on reasoning-intensive tasks, including
mathematics (Lightman et al., 2024), coding (Chen et al., 2021), and questions that involve significant
domain knowledge (Rein et al., 2024). However, current reasoning LLMs only start to think after
receiving the complete user input, which is reasonable for turn-based interactions, i.e., the model
processes the user’s message after it is fully composed and sent.
In contrast, human behavior in spoken communication is different. Humans naturally think while
listening, far before the speaker finishes their turn (Bögels et al., 2015; Corps et al., 2018; Bögels et al.,
2018). Thinking during listening offers two key advantages: (1) It enables timely and well-founded
reactions, including interruption, even before the speaker’s turn ends. (2) It reduces response latency
by allowing answer preparation to begin before the speaker finishes speaking. Motivated by these
∗
†

Work done during an internship at Microsoft GenAI. dcml0714@gmail.com
Correspondence: xiaofei.wang@microsoft.com

1

Work in Progress

SLM speech
output timeline

Legends
Thinking tokens
Response tokens

SLM token
output timeline

Speech features
Spoken Language Model

Speech encoder
Speech decoder

SLM input
timeline

Tool call
Retrieval

User speaking
timeline

User start speaking

SLM interrupts user

Figure 1: The timing diagram of S HANKS. As the user speaks, their speech is segmented into
chunks for every tchunk seconds and streamed to the SLM. After receiving an input chunk, S HANKS
generates the thinking tokens, which might include calling external tools or determining to interrupt
the user. When the user is speaking the i-th speech chunk Si , S HANKS generates the (i − 1)-th
thinking chunk Ri−1 , achieving thinking while listening. When the current speech chunk Si is fully
spoken by the user, S HANKS stops the thinking for Ri−1 , adds the latest speech Si and the previous
reasoning Ri−1 to its context, and begins the i-th thinking chunk Ri .

observations, we propose a method to enable spoken language models (SLMs) to think while listening
to input speech.
In this paper, we introduce S HANKS: Simultaneous Hearing and Thinking with Chunked Input
Speech. S HANKS is a general inference framework for both end-to-end (E2E) and cascade SLMs to
achieve thinking while listening. At inference time, S HANKS processes the user input in a fixed-size
chunk. Once a chunk of speech input is received, S HANKS generates a chunk of unspoken thinking
tokens based on all previous input speech chunks and previous thinking chunks. S HANKS alternates
between receiving the input speech chunk and generating an unspoken CoT reasoning when the user
is still emitting the next speech chunk, achieving the thinking while listening. During the thinking
process, S HANKS can decide to interrupt the user or make tool calls to prepare for the final spoken
response. The inference workflow of S HANKS is depicted in Figure 1.
We use two scenarios to show how S HANKS can improve real-time user-SLM interaction. First, we
study a scenario where the user first describes a math question and then describes their step-by-step
solution. S HANKS can listen to the user’s problem-solving process and perform internal thinking in
the meantime to interrupt the user when the user makes a mistake in their solution. This scenario
has great potential in educational use cases, where the SLM serves as a tutor to guide the student.
Compared to a baseline that makes an interruption without thinking, S HANKS interrupts 71% more
when the user makes a mistake, while the interruption made by S HANKS is 37.1% more valid.
Next, we focus on a task-oriented dialogue setting, where the user requests the SLMs to assist with
a travel plan, and the model needs to call Booking.com APIs to complete the user’s request and
respond to the user. Without S HANKS, all the tool calls can only be made after the user’s speech
ends, resulting in a higher response latency. We use S HANKS to make tool calls when the user is still
speaking. S HANKS enables the model to successfully complete 56.9% of API calls while the user is
still speaking, reducing the latency of the final response.
We summarize our contribution as follows:
1. We propose S HANKS, a general framework for SLMs that enables thinking while listening.
To the best of our knowledge, we are the first to explore generating unspoken CoT reasoning
when the user is still speaking.
2

Work in Progress

2. We show that S HANKS can interrupt the user more accurately compared to a baseline that
interrupts without thinking.
3. Using S HANKS, the SLM can successfully make tool calls before the user even finishes
talking.

2

M ETHOD : S IMULTANEOUS H EARING AND T HINKING WITH C HUNKED
I NPUT S PEECH

Current LLMs and SLMs only start to think after the user’s input is completed. In contrast, humans
can think while listening (Bögels et al., 2015; Corps et al., 2018; Bögels et al., 2018), where we reason
over what we just heard, guess what the speaker might be up to, and prepare the necessary ingredients
to cook up a good response. Thinking while listening allows us to interact with the speaker better
when the speaker is still speaking. In this section, we introduce S HANKS, a general framework to
make SLMs capable of thinking while listening. Here, we only discuss the basic form of S HANKS,
and we defer the more advanced usages, including interruption or tool call, to later sections.
2.1

I NFERENCE

During inference, S HANKS requires that the user’s input speech comes in a streaming manner.
S HANKS processes the streaming user input speech by a fixed chunk size of tchunk seconds. We use
Si to denote the i-th user input speech chunk, where Si is an audio chunk of tchunk seconds, except
for the last chunk SN , which may be shorter. When the user is still speaking, S HANKS alternately
takes the user speech Si and generates the thinking chunks Ri conditioning on all previous user
speech and all previous thinking chunks. The thinking chunks Ri are not spoken by the SLM; they
only serve as the internal reasoning process of the SLM.
Here, we walk through what happens for S HANKS during inference. The following contents are best
read with Figure 1. At t = 0, the user begins to talk. When t = tchunk , the user speech from 0 to
tchunk , i.e., S1 , is sent to the SLM. Here, we append a special token [EOPA] (end of partial audio)
after S1 to let the SLM know that this is the end of a chunk of partial user speech. Based on S1 ,
the SLM generates the first thinking chunk R1 . A thinking chunk is enclosed in two special tokens
<think> and </think>. The SLM generates R1 during the interval t = tchunk to t = 2tchunk ,
and the user is still speaking the second chunk S2 at the same time.
Since tchunk is the time for the SLM to generate its thinking, the duration of tchunk cannot be selected
too small; otherwise, the SLM may not be able to produce meaningful thinking chunks. The number
of thinking tokens in Ri is restricted to no more than tchunk × ntps , where ntps is the number of
tokens the model can generate per second. Unless specified, we select tchunk = 4.0s in our paper;
a 7B model can generate around 320 tokens on a single A100 GPU in this duration. At the end of
tchunk , if the thinking chunk has not finished generating, i.e., the </think> token has not been
emitted, we directly stop generating and append the </think> token at the end of the thinking
chunk.
At t = 2tchunk , we take the freshly obtained user speech chunk S2 (from t = tchunk to t = 2tchunk )
and pass this chunk to the SLM, and again appending the [EOPA] after this chunk to generate the
next thinking chunk. (Assume that the user still has not ended their turn at t = 2tchunk .) When
generating the next thinking chunk R2 , the SLM conditions on S1 , R1 , and S2 . The SLM will
continue the process of taking user input speech chunks and generating the thinking chunks until the
user ends their speech in the N -th chunk of speech, SN . After the user ends their speech, we feed the
last speech chunk SN into the SLM, while this time we append a different special token [EOA] (end
of audio), indicating that the user’s speech has ended. Based on SN and all the previous interleaved
speech/thinking chunks {S1 , R1 , · · · , SN −1 , RN −1 }, the SLM generates the thinking chunk RN and
then generates a final response chunk O. Only the final response O will be spoken by the SLM.
Since S HANKS chunks the user input using a fixed-duration chunk tchunk , the model’s thinking
will lag behind the user’s speech by at least tchunk seconds. If the user’s speech is less than tchunk ,
S HANKS cannot think while listening. However, since long speech can easily happen in real-world
interaction, this limitation might not be a significant weakness of S HANKS.
3

Work in Progress

(a) Basic Training seqience
(b) Training seq. with interrupt

[INTERRUPT]

(c) Training seq. with API call

Figure 2: Illustration of the training data. Si : the speech for the i-th user speech chunk; Ri : the
i-th thinking block after Si ; O: the final response block; Ai : the API call responses after the speech
chunk Si . Blocks in dashed lines do not contribute to the training loss, while blocks in solid lines are
included for loss calculation. (a) The general training sequence: Alternating between user speech
block and SLM thinking token chunks (Section 2.2), followed by a final response chunk. (b) Training
data with interruption: Alternating between user speech blocks and the thinking token chunks, while
the last thinking chunk includes a special token [INTERRUPT]. (c) Training data with API calls:
Similar to (a), while each thinking chunk may be separated into two blocks Ri−1 and Ri−2 by the
API call response Ai .
2.2

T RAINING

During inference, S HANKS requires the SLM to generate thinking chunks based on all previous user
input speech chunks and the model’s own thinking chunks. During training, we prepare datasets to
make the SLM learn this behavior. Assume that we have a complete user speech S, we can segment it
into N chunks {S1 , · · · , SN } with a fixed duration tchunk . Next, assume that we use some method to
obtain the thinking chunks {R1 , · · · , RN } and the output response O; we will explain how to obtain
them in later sections. After preparing the training data, we use the standard language modeling
cross-entropy loss to train the SLM to predict R1 given {S1 }, predict R2 given {S1 , R1 , S2 }, etc., and
predict RN and O given {S1 , R1 , · · · , SN −1 }. A full training sequence is depicted in Figure 2(a).

3

TASK I NTRODUCTION

After introducing the basics of S HANKS, we use two tasks to demonstrate how S HANKS can be
applied. In this section, we explain the setup of the two scenarios and how S HANKS works at
inference time.
3.1

S CENARIO 1: I NTERRUPTING U SER T URN

In the first scenario, we aim to use S HANKS to make SLMs able to interrupt the user when the user
is saying something wrong. The significance of this application lies in its potential in educational
use cases, where the SLMs can serve as a tutor and listen to the speaker, a student, describing how
they solve a problem. The SLM can make a timely interruption to let the student know that they are
making a mistake, allowing them to correct it as early as possible.
Interruption is related to the full-duplex ability of spoken language models (Lin et al., 2025). While
most prior works on full-duplex SLMs focus on user interrupting SLMs, we focus on the reverse
scenario: SLM interrupting users. As an important note, we do not advocate that it is good to have a
model that interrupts the user. Some users might find it annoying and unpleasant when interrupted
by an SLM. Our goal is a modeling mechanism that enables interruption, leaving model deployer
policies and users to decide when (or whether) to turn it on.
3.1.1

TASK D ESCRIPTION

We explain the precise task we are studying. In this task, the user describes a math problem and
then solves the problem. The user’s solution does not simply state the answer; the user describes a
step-by-step problem-solving process, which might be correct or wrong. The SLM needs to interrupt
the user when the user is making a mistake, and not to interrupt the user when the solution is correct.
As this is a novel task and there is no available data, we built the evaluation data ourselves. First, we
construct the user speech. A single user speech includes (1) a math question and (2) a step-by-step
solution. We source the math questions from the testing data of GSM8K (Cobbe et al., 2021), a
grade-school math word problem dataset commonly used for evaluating mathematical reasoning
4

Work in Progress

ability (Wei et al., 2022; Kojima et al., 2022; Wang et al., 2023). Next, we use two LLMs, Llama2-7B (Touvron et al., 2023) and Llama3.1-8B (Grattafiori et al., 2024), to generate step-by-step
answers for those questions, and use GPT-4o (OpenAI, 2024b) to determine if the answer generated
by the two models matches the ground truth answer in the dataset. We select these two models
since they can generate CoT reasoning to solve the math problem, and their performance on GSM8K
is very different: Llama-2-7B is a weaker model and prone to generating wrong solutions, while
Llama-3.1-8B is a stronger model, which can generate more accurate solutions.
After we have the texts for the step-by-step solution, we convert them into speech. We use GPT-4o
to rewrite the answers generated by the two Llama models to make the solution more colloquial.
Next, we concatenate the original question, the colloquial step-by-step answer, and prepend a prefix
”I want to solve the following question.” to form the transcription of a testing instance. We use
GPT-4o-mini-TTS (OpenAI, 2024a) to synthesize the speech.
The final testing dataset includes 1280 instances with correct solutions and 1140 with incorrect
solutions. We call the former the ”correct subset” and the latter the ”incorrect subset. The average
duration of the user’s speech is around 49.25 seconds.
3.1.2

T RAINING DATA FOR I NTERRUPTION

To teach the model to think while listening and determine whether to interrupt, the training data in
this task include two types of instances: (1) The user provides a correct step-by-step solution to the
question, and the model does not interrupt the user during the user’s speech. After the user finishes
the speech, the output response acknowledges the correctness of the answer. (2) The user’s turn
unfolds an erroneous problem-solving process, and the model interrupts the user when the user makes
the first mistake and clearly explains what is wrong.
To construct such a training dataset, we use the math questions in Tulu3-Persona-Math-Grade (Lambert et al., 2024) to construct the user speech S (including the question and the step-by-step solution)
following the previously described procedure, and then segment the speech by a fixed duration
tchunk = 4 seconds to obtain {S1 , · · · , SN }.
Next, we use GPT-4o to generate the thinking chunk Ri . When generating the i-th thinking chunk Ri ,
the input to GPT-4o includes the transcriptions of all previous user speech chunks {S1 , · · · , Si } and
all previous thinking chunks {R1 , · · · , Ri−1 }. GPT-4o is required to do the following in the thinking
chunk: (1) Track the information already known and calculate intermediate variables when they are
available. (2) Identify if any errors are in the current user’s transcription. If there is an error, GPT-4o
should generate a [INTERRUPT] token at the end of the thinking chunk, indicating that the user
should be interrupted. We give GPT-4o four in-context examples to allow GPT-4o to understand the
task. The prompt to GPT-4o is given in Table 3 and 4 in the Appendix.
After generating the thinking chunks, we generate the final output response O. For the user speeches
with an error-free solution, the output response simply needs to let the user know that their solution is
correct. We prompt GPT-4o to generate the final response based on the transcription of the full user
speech and all previous thinking chunks. Now, we can form a training data sequence by interleaving
Si and Ri and then appending O in the end.
For those user speeches with a wrong solution, the output response will be an interruption to the
user’s speech. Assume that based on our previous process for generating the Ri ’s, GPT-4o decides to
interrupt the user after the user speech chunk Sk , i.e., the thinking chunk Rk includes the interruption
token [INTERRUPT]. To generate a response for interruption, we give GPT-4o the user’s speech up
to the k-th user speech chunk and all the previous thinking, and ask GPT-4o to generate a response O
to interrupt the user. The interruption should be precise on what error is made by the user and how to
correct it. After this process, we can interleave S1 to Sk with R1 to Rk and append O in the end to
form a training sequence. A figurative illustration of this training instance is shown in Figure 2(b).
Note that in the last thinking chunk Rk , there will be a special token [INTERRUPT], indicating that
the model is going to interrupt the user.
3.1.3

I NFERENCE AND E VALUATION

During inference, we stream the user speech to the SLM by a fixed chunk size tchunk , and follow the
inference procedure elaborated in Section 2.1. If the SLM generates the special token [INTERRUPT]
5

Work in Progress

in a thinking chunk Rk and outputs a response chunk O (when the user is emitting speech chunk
Sk+1 ), we convert the response token into speech to interrupt the user. Once an interruption happens,
the future user speech chunks will not be streamed to the SLM.
We evaluate a model on the testing dataset constructed in Section 3.1.1. We use the following metrics:
1. Interrupt ratio: The ratio of total interrupted instances among the total instances. A good
model should have a low interrupt ratio on the correct subset and a high interrupt ratio on
the wrong subset.
2. Valid interrupt ratio: This is used to evaluate whether an interruption made by the model
is valid, and the valid interrupt ratio is defined as the ratio of valid interruptions among
the total interruptions. To judge whether an interruption response O is valid or not, we use
LLM-as-a-judge (Chiang & Lee, 2023; Zheng et al., 2023). We give the judge LLM (GPT4o) the transcription of the user input until the time of interruption1 and output response O
from the model, and ask the LLM judge to determine if the model’s interruption response O
correctly interrupts the user when there are unclear or mistakes in the user’s speech. The
prompt given to the judge model is shown in Table 10 in the Appendix.
3. Interruption latency: The time of the model interruption compared to the time when
the first error happens in the user’s speech, denoted as terror . This metric is only used
to evaluate the incorrect subset. For samples in the incorrect subset, we use GPT-4o to
determine terror . The details on determining terror are included in Appendix C.1. Assume
that the model interrupts the user at tinterrupt , then the interruption latency is calculated as
tinterrupt − terror , where tinterrupt is the time when the model starts to emit the first package
of the speech for the interruption output O.
3.2

S CENARIO 2: M AKING T OOL C ALLS W HEN L ISTENING

In the previous scenario, we have introduced S HANKS can be used to think when listening to interrupt
the user when necessary. However, the ”thinking” of a model can not only include the CoT reasoning
generated by the model itself; the model can use external tools in their thinking process to complete
the user’s request and improve the answer quality (Schick et al., 2023; Qin et al., 2024b;a; Gao et al.,
2024; Wang et al., 2024). In the second scenario, the SLMs will use external tools in their thinking
process to achieve the user’s request.
This kind of tool-augmented generation has been widely explored in text-in-text-out LLMs (Qin et al.,
2024a). Given a user request, a tool-augmented LLM selects relevant tools such as calculators (Schick
et al., 2023), search engines (Luo et al., 2023), and other APIs (Qin et al., 2024b), and integrates
the tool execution results into its reasoning process. However, current tool-augmented LLMs begin
calling the tools after the full user input is received, which adds delay while the model invokes tools,
waits for results, parses them, and composes a response. This delay may be acceptable in text-only
settings, but in spoken dialogue, this latency breaks conversational flow.
In the second task, we will use S HANKS to make tool calls when the user is still speaking, thus
reducing the response latency due to making tool calls. As a proof of concept, we consider a taskoriented dialogue where the SLM serves as a travel-agency agent and is given a set of APIs it may
call to complete the task. For example, the user might say, ”Help me check the details of the cheapest
flight from Hangzhou to Seoul on December 10, 2024, and the car rental information near Seoul
airport.” The SLM makes API calls to resolve airport names or codes, search for flights, and then
query car-rental options, and finally composes the results into a single reply.
Given a user query like the example above, once the destination and date are clear, the flight search
API can be called even when the user is only halfway through speaking. This is where S HANKS can
be useful: processing partial user input and performing early actions. Next, we formally introduce
the task we study and how we evaluate it.
1
If the interruption happens in Ri , the user is currently speaking the (i + 1)-th speech chunk Si+1 , as the
thinking Ri happens simultaneously when the user says Si+1 . Consequently, we also feed the transcription of
Si+1 into the judge model when determining whether the interruption is valid. Nevertheless, we do not find the
results to differ significantly if we only give the judge model up to the speech chunk Si .

6

Work in Progress

3.2.1

TASK D ESCRIPTION

To show that SLMs can make tool calls when listening to the user request, we adopt ComplexFuncBench (Zhong et al., 2025), an evaluation dataset that assesses LLMs’ ability to make multi-step
API calls. An instance in ComplexFuncBench includes a user query in text specifying some requirements for a travel plan and a list of tool descriptions that are required to complete the task. Some
example tools include APIs for searching hotels or flights.
An evaluated model needs to make relevant API calls and provide the resulting information to the user.
A single user query typically requires multiple API calls, and these calls may have dependencies in
which the output of one call becomes an argument to a subsequent call, so the call order matters and
some calls may not be run in parallel. For each instance, the dataset provides the ground truth API calls
and their corresponding API responses, which can be used to evaluate whether the model’s API call
is correct. To adapt ComplexFuncBench to our spoken-dialogue setting, we use GPT-4o-mini-TTS to
synthesize the user’s spoken query from the text instructions from ComplexFuncBench.
3.2.2

T RAINING DATA FOR T OOL C ALL

To train S HANKS to perform Tool calls when listening, we need to teach the model to make API calls
in their thinking process Ri based on user input speech chunk Si . We split half of the instances in
ComplexFuncBench to construct the training data and the other half as the testing data.2 The speech
chunks Si in the training data can simply be obtained from segmenting the audio of the user query
speech.
The next step is to construct the thinking chunks Ri . In this task, the thinking chunk Ri is the API
calls and call responses. For each user query, ComplexFuncBench already provides the ground truth
API calls to complete the task, and we only need to determine which API calls, among the ground
truth API calls, can be made after a speech chunk Si . To determine which API calls can be made in
Ri , recall that a thinking chunk Ri is based on the user speech up to i × tchunk seconds, so as long
as the speech up to i × tchunk provides the information to make an ground truth API call, that API
call can be included in Ri . We follow the above idea and prompt GPT-o1 (OpenAI, 2024c) with the
transcription of the user speech, the time alignment of each word in the user’s speech, and the ground
truth APIs, and ask GPT-o1 to determine the earliest time an API call can be made. The prompt is
shown in Table 8 in the Appendix. Based on the above process, we can determine which ground truth
APIs should be included in which thinking chunk Ri . A thinking chunk Ri can have more than one
API call and response. If no API calls can be made in Ri , we put a template message that says there
are no additional tool calls that can be made currently.
The final response O is also generated with GPT-4o by prompting it to generate a final response
based on the user query, all the ground truth API calls, and the corresponding responses. During
training, the descriptions of the API calls necessary to complete the user’s request will be included in
the system prompt to let the model know what APIs can be used.
An illustration of a training instance is shown in Figure 2(c). During training, the loss for the API
call response in Ri is masked. Training on this dataset will teach the model to make API calls based
on incomplete user queries as long as the information for an API call is sufficient.
3.2.3

I NFERENCE AND E VALUATION

During inference, for a testing instance, the model is given the user’s speech in a streaming manner;
the descriptions of the APIs that can be used in this testing instance. When the model makes an API
call, we use GPT-4o as a judge to determine if the API call matches one of the ground truth API calls,
and return the response of the ground truth API call if a match is found. If the API call does not
match the API call in the ground truth, we return a generic error message. Using GPT-4o to match
the API call made by the model against the ground truth follows one of the evaluation protocols in
the original ComplexFuncBench (Zhong et al., 2025).
2
ComplexFuncBench is originally designed as an evaluation dataset. Here, we train the model directly on
this dataset since the models we use were not trained to perform tool call. Since our training data has the exactly
same distribution as the testing data, our results should not be compared with other models that are not trained
on this dataset.

7

Work in Progress

The testing set includes 500 instances, and each testing instance requires 5.1 API calls to complete on
average. The average duration of the audio of the user’s speech is 18.71 seconds. We evaluate the
performance using five metrics:
1. Call accuracy: The number of ground truth API calls that are successfully made by the
model, divided by the total number of ground truth API calls. We also calculate the early
call accuracy, defined as the ground truth API calls that are successfully made when the
user is still speaking, divided by the total number of ground truth API calls. Similarly, we
calculate the late call accuracy, where the dividend is the ground truth API calls that are
successfully made after the user finishes speaking. This helps us understand how well the
model uses the time when the user is still speaking; this can be used as a proxy to measure
latency.
2. Success rate: The percentage of user queries that are successfully completed. If all the
ground truth API calls for a user query are successfully made, the task is considered
successful.
3. Correctness: We evaluate if the final response O is accurate and aligns with the API call
responses. Following Zhong et al. (2025), we use GPT-4o to give a score in {0, 1, 2},
indicating if the transcription of the response O is completely incorrect, partially correct, or
completely correct the user’s request.
4. Completeness: We evaluate if the final response O fully satisfies the user’s request. Following Zhong et al. (2025), we use GPT-4o to give a score in {0, 1, 2}, indicating if the
transcription of the response O does not satisfy, partially satisfies, or fully satisfies the user’s
request.
5. Latency: We evaluate the response latency by the number of tokens the model generates
before it emits the final response O and after the user has finished their turn. We choose to
report the token count instead of the exact time since the precise time to emit these tokens
depends on hardware and implementation.

4

C OMPARED M ETHODS

In this section, we introduce the models that we will compare in our experiments, including two
variants of the S HANKS models. Additionally, for each task in Section 3.1 and 3.2, we include
a scenario-specific baseline model. The training details and hyperparameters are included in Appendix B.
4.1

S HANKS -E2E

We fine-tune an end-to-end (E2E) SLM to make it able to think while listening. We will use Qwen2.5-Omni (Qwen-omni for short) (Xu et al., 2025a), one of the best open-sourced end-to-end SLMs,
in our experiment. Qwen-omni is a thinker-talker SLM. The thinker takes speech representation
extracted by a speech encoder (Chu et al., 2024) as the input and generates text tokens. The talker
functions like a text-to-speech (TTS) model, taking the hidden representation from the thinker as the
input and generating the output speech.
Originally, Qwen-omni is not capable of performing unspoken thinking – every token (and its
corresponding hidden representation) generated by the thinker will be sent to the talker model and
synthesized into speech. After fine-tuning the thinker model on the training dataset mentioned before,
the model will learn to enclose the unspoken thinking process within <think> and </think>.
Since we only want the Qwen-omni to speak out the response tokens, we only pass the response
tokens and their hidden states to the talker.
As stated in Section 2.1, S HANKS uses the time when the user is speaking the next speech chunk
Si+1 to generate the thinking chunk Ri , so the number of thinking tokens in Ri cannot exceed
tchunk × ntps , where ntps is the number of tokens the model can generate per second.3
3
The tokens in the API call responses are not included in the tchunk × ntps limit since these are not the
tokens generated by the SLM itself. For simplicity, we do not consider the API call latency, as our environment
already prepares all the ground truth API responses.

8

Work in Progress

4.2

S HANKS -C ASCADE

We set up a cascade version of S HANKS. Precisely, we cascade an ASR (Whisper-large-v3 (Radford
et al., 2023)) with a stronger text-only LLM, Qwen-2.5-7B-Instruct (Qwen et al., 2025), to make the
LLM generate thinking chunks while reading the partial transcription. Qwen-2.5-7B-Instruct and
Qwen-omni are fine-tuned from the same base model, while Qwen-2.5-7B-Instruct are fine-tuned on a
much larger reasoning dataset. This baseline allows us to know what the performance of S HANKS can
be if we use a model with better reasoning ability as the backbone. The training data of S HANKS-E2E
and Cascade are almost the same, only differing in the input modality.
4.3

S CENARIO -S PECIFIC BASELINES

4.3.1

BASELINE FOR I NTERRUPTION

We fine-tune a baseline model using Qwen-omni, which we name ”No-thinking”. We fine-tune
it to predict whether it should interrupt the user without any thinking. The model is trained to
predict special tokens, [NO INTERRUPT] or [INTERRUPT], to indicate whether the model should
interrupt the user, given chunked user input speech. This can be thought of as S HANKS while the
thinking chunks only contain a [NO INTERRUPT] or [INTERRUPT] special token.
We do not compare with other models since there are no other models that can interrupt the user.
While some full-duplex SLMs should be able to interrupt the user by design (Défossez et al., 2024),
we find that these models cannot interrupt the user at all. We also find that closed-source models like
GPT-4o cannot interrupt the user when the user is still talking.
4.3.2

BASELINE FOR T OOL C ALL

For this baseline, we fine-tune a model using Qwen-omni that takes the full user speech and then
makes all the API calls. We call this model ”Call-after-listen”. This serves as a baseline that
waits until receiving the full user input and then begins to make API calls; this is how existing
tool-augmented models operate. During inference, this model takes the complete user query and then
iteratively makes API calls and receives the responses until the model thinks all necessary API calls
are made, and then generates the final response.

5

E XPERIMENT R ESULTS

5.1

R ESULTS FOR S CENARIO 1: I NTERRUPTING U SER T URN

The results for interrupting the user turn are presented in Table 1. We have the following observations.
S HANKS is more likely to interrupt on the wrong subset. Comparing the interruption ratio of
S HANKS on the correct and wrong subsets, the interruption ratio is 54.2% higher on the wrong subset.
This shows that S HANKS is indeed capable of capturing the errors in the user’s speech and interrupt
appropriately. Based on the valid interruption ratio for the wrong subset, about 2 out of 3 interruptions
made by S HANKS are valid. Interesting, on the correct subset, the valid interruption ratio is non-zero.
By looking into the instances in the correct subset, we find that even if their final answers are correct,
sometimes their intermediate reasoning may be odd or ambiguous, and the model will interrupt and
ask for clarification. Prior works also reported that even if the final answer of the model is correct,
the CoT reasoning may be wrong (Golovneva et al., 2023). In this case, the LLM judge treats this
kind of interruption as valid.
S HANKS’ interruption latency shows that the model mostly interrupts after the error occurs.
On the wrong subset, the interruption latency of S HANKS-E2E is 5.08 seconds on average. In
Figure 5 in the Appendix, we further plot the distribution of the interruption latency. We find that
the interruption latency on the wrong dataset is left-skewed, where more samples fall on the right
proportion of the distribution and have a positive interruption latency. This indicates that most
interruption happens later than the first error.
A qualitative example in Figure 3 shows that S HANKS-E2E can interrupt the user when there is
a mistake. To allow the readers to have a better idea of how S HANKS interrupts the user, we show
9

Work in Progress

Table 1: Results for interrupting the user. We report the interruption ratio and valid interruption ratio
in percentage, and the interruption latency in seconds. tchunk = 4.0 in the top three rows.
Correct Subset (1280)
Methods
No-thinking
S HANKS-E2E
S HANKS-Cascade

Wrong Subset (1140)

Interrupt
Valid interrupt
Interrupt
Valid interrupt Interruption
ratio (%) (↓) ratio (%) (↑) ratio (%) (↑) ratio (%) (↑)
latency (s)
1.4%
30.6%
24.9%

16.7%
25.7%
40.3%

13.8%
84.8%
86.1%

26.8%
63.9%
78.3%

6.46
5.08
6.90

60.3%
66.2%

1.56
8.19

Ablations for S HANKS-E2E
tchunk = 3
tchunk = 5

41.1%
26.9%

21.4%
36.9%

88.7%
83.1%

an example in Figure 3. When the user unfolds the question, S HANKS already starts thinking about
the math question. For example, when t ∈ [4tchunk , 5tchunk ], the model’s thinking already calculates
several intermediate variables, including the number of total petunias and sweet potato vines. When
the user finishes stating the question after t = 6tchunk , the model already completes the calculation
and has the correct answer in its mind. The model also correctly identifies the user’s error in falsely
calculating that there are 25 petunias and interrupts the user during t ∈ [12tchunk , 13tchunk ].
Interruption without thinking leads to much poorer performance. The performance of the
no-thinking baseline is much worse than S HANKS, which performs reasoning before interrupting.
The no-thinking baseline has a much lower interruption ratio on the wrong subset, and the valid
interrupt ratio is also much lower than S HANKS. This shows that thinking before interruption is
important, justifying the design of S HANKS.
Cascade version of S HANKS with stronger LLM leads to the best performance. When using
Qwen-2.5-7B-Instruct as the backbone model for S HANKS, the performance can be even better.
The interruption ratio on the correct subset is lower, and the valid interruption ratio on the wrong
subset also grows higher. This shows that the interruption ability of S HANKS is mostly related to
the reasoning ability of the backbone model, and using a stronger reasoning LLM can improve the
performance.
Varying tchunk at inference time does not significantly affect the performance. When constructing the training data, we fix tchunk = 4 seconds. Here, we ask whether we can vary tchunk at
inference time. Since the thinking of S HANKS always lags behind the latest user speech by tchunk
seconds, changing tchunk can affect how soon the SLM can hear the latest user speech and affect the
response latency. As an ablation, we change tchunk to 3 and 5 during inference without retraining
S HANKS -E2E. The results are shown in the bottom two rows in Table 1. On the wrong subset, we do
not find the interrupt ratio and valid interrupt ratio to change significantly compared with tchunk = 4.
Interestingly, we find that the interrupt latency on the wrong subset for tchunk = 3 is the smallest,
while the tchunk = 5 has the largest interrupt latency.
5.2

R ESULTS FOR S CENARIO 2: M AKING T OOL C ALLS W HEN L ISTENING

Next, we move on to the second scenario: making tool calls when listening. The experiment results
are presented in Table 2. We summarize the main findings as follows:
S HANKS successfully makes at least 56.9% of API calls when the user is still speaking. Among
the successful API calls made by the two S HANKS models, about 80% to 90% of the API calls are
made during the user speech. In the example in Figure 4, S HANKS -E2E makes four out of six API
calls when the user is still speaking. Compared to the call-after-listen baseline, which makes all the
API calls after the user turn finishes, S HANKS can significantly reduce the response latency by using
the time the user is speaking to make tool calls.
Call-after-listen has a higher success rate and response quality. While S HANKS elegantly uses
the user speaking time to make API calls, the success rate and response quality (correctness and
10

Work in Progress

I want to solve following question. Catherine has five
The user’s tone is neutral, and they are introducing a question they want to solve. The question involves someone named Catherine, who has five of
something. The user has not yet specified what these five items are or what the problem entails. It could be a math problem, a logic puzzle, or a real-life
scenario. I will wait for more details to understand the context and determine the nature of the problem. If the user provides a specific question, I will aim to
solve it step by step and compare my solution with theirs.
hanging baskets to fill. In each basket, she wants to add three
The user is introducing a question involving someone named Catherine, who has five of something. It is unclear what the five items are or what the question
is about yet. I will wait for more details before forming any thoughts or calculations.
petunias and two sweet potato vines. The petunias
Now I know that Catherine has five hanging baskets to fill, and she wants to add three of something to each basket. The user hasn’t specified what the
three items are yet—whether they are plants, decorations, or something else. This could lead to a math problem involving multiplication or distribution. I will
wait for more details to clarify the situation and determine the exact question.
cost $3 a piece and the sweet potato vines cost
Now I know that Catherine has five hanging baskets, and in each basket, she wants to add three petunias and two sweet potato vines. The user is likely
setting up a math or logic problem involving the total number of items needed. I can already calculate the total number of petunias and sweet potato vines
required: - Petunias: 5 baskets × 3 petunias per basket = 15 petunias. - Sweet potato vines: 5 baskets × 2 sweet potato vines per basket = 10 sweet potato
vines. I will wait for the user to finish the question to confirm if this is the intended calculation or if there are additional details
$2.50 a piece. How much will she spend filling
Now I know that the petunias cost $3 each, and the sweet potato vines also have a cost, but the user hasn’t specified it yet. This seems to be leading
toward a financial calculation problem involving the total cost of filling the baskets. I can already start calculating the cost of the petunias: 5 baskets × 3
petunias per basket × $3 per petunia = $45 for the petunias. I will wait for the user to provide the cost of the sweet potato vines to complete the calculation.
all five hanging baskets? Here is my solution. Catherine
Now I know the cost of each petunia is $3, and the cost of each sweet potato vine is $2.50. I can calculate the total cost for filling the baskets:
- Petunias: 15 × $3 = $45.
- Sweet potato vines: 10 × $2.50 = $25.
Total cost = $45 + $25 = $70.
I have the answer and can provide it to the user if they ask.

has five hanging baskets to fill and each basket gets
Now I have all the necessary information to calculate the total cost of filling the five hanging baskets.
1. Cost of petunias:
- 5 baskets × 3 petunias per basket × $3 per petunia = $45.
2. Cost of sweet potato vines:
- 5 baskets × 2 sweet potato vines per basket × $2.50 per sweet potato vine = $25.
3. Total cost:
- $45 (petunias) + $25 (sweet potato vines) = $70.
The total cost for filling all five hanging baskets is $70. I will now listen to the user's solution and compare it with mine. If there is any mistake in their
solution, I will interrupt them.
three petunias and two sweet potato vines. That's five
The user is beginning to explain their solution. I will compare their solution to mine as they proceed. So far, I know the total cost is $70, based on my
calculations. If the user makes any errors in their solution, I will interrupt them immediately to correct it. I will wait for more details from their explanation
before making any judgments.
baskets times three petunias and two sweet potato vines
The user is reiterating the details of the problem: each basket gets three petunias and two sweet potato vines. This matches the information I already have.
I will continue to listen to their solution and compare it with my own calculation of $70. If they make any errors, I will interrupt them.
per basket, which totals 25 flowers. The
The user is correctly stating the quantities of petunias and sweet potato vines per basket. This aligns with the information provided earlier. I will continue to
listen to their solution and verify if their calculations match mine. If they make any errors, I will interrupt them immediately.
petunias cost $3 each, so 25 petunias
The user is now calculating the total number of flowers per basket, which is 3 petunias + 2 sweet potato vines = 5 flowers per basket. This aligns with my
understanding so far. I will continue to listen to their solution and verify if their subsequent calculations match mine. If they make any errors, I will interrupt
them immediately.
at $3 each is $75. The sweet potato
The user is now calculating the cost of the petunias. They correctly state that there are 25 petunias in total (5 baskets × 3 petunias per basket). At $3 each,
the cost for the petunias is 25 × $3 = $75. However, this contradicts my earlier calculation, where the cost of the petunias was $45 (5 baskets × 3 petunias
per basket × $3 per petunia). I need to interrupt the user to clarify this discrepancy.
Hold on, I think there might be a discrepancy. Earlier, you mentioned 5 baskets with 3 petunias each, which totals 15 petunias, not 25. At $3 each,
that would cost $45, not $75. Could you clarify this?
vines are $2.50 each, so 25 vines

Figure 3: An example from the interruption scenario in Section 3.2. The chunks in red are the
transcriptions of a user describing a math problem and attempting to solve it step-by-step. The
thinking chunks (in green) and interruption response (in orange) are generated by S HANKS-E2E. For
each time slot from ntchunk to (n + 1)tchunk , the chunks in green (SLM thinking chunks) and orange
(output response) happen sequentially, while the user speech chunk (in red) happens concurrent to
other blocks in the same time slot.

completeness) lag behind call-after listen. We find that this is because during inference, if the API
call fails during Ri , S HANKS seldom retries the failed API call in future Rj , where j > i. On the
other hand, the call-after-listen baseline is more likely to retry failed API calls.
Combining S HANKS and call-after-listen yields the best performance. To solve the previously
observed issue, a simple method is to use S HANKS when the user is still speaking and back off to
call-after-listening when the user’s speech ends. Precisely, when the user is still speaking, we use
11

Work in Progress

Table 2: Results for API calls. “Early” and “Late” are computed over the total set of ground-truth
API calls; they need not sum to 100% because some calls may be incorrect.
Method
Call-after-listen
S HANKS -E2E
S HANKS -C ASCADE
S HANKS+Call-after-listen

Call accuracy (%)
Early Late Total
0.0
56.9
63.9
57.3

86.5
14.4
5.4
32.8

Success rate
(%)

Correctness
(0-2)

Completeness
(0-2)

Latency
(token)

63.2
35.2
34.9
62.3

1.17
0.79
0.73
1.31

1.37
1.00
1.00
1.43

313
54
153
117

86.5
71.3
69.3
90.0

Help me check the details of the cheapest flight from Hangzhou to Seoul
<tool_call>{"name": "Search_Flight_Location", "arguments": {"query": "Hangzhou"}}</tool_call>
(API call responses. Omitted for simplicity)
<tool_call>{"name": "Search_Flight_Location", "arguments": {"query": "Seoul"}}</tool_call>
(API call responses. Omitted for simplicity)
All the tool calls have been made. I will wait for additional information from the user.
on December 10, 2024, and the car rental
The user is still providing the information. There are no additional information that is sufficient to make another tool call.
information near Seoul airport. I want to rent a
<tool_call>{"name": "Search_Flights", "arguments": {"fromId": "HGH.AIRPORT", "toId": "ICN.AIRPORT", "departDate": "2024-12-10", "sort": "CHEAPEST"}}
</tool_call>
(API call responses. Omitted for simplicity)
All the tool calls have been made. I will wait for additional information from the user.
car at the airport at 3pm on the day I arrive,
<tool_call>{"name": "Search_Car_Location", "arguments": {"query": "Incheon International Airport"}}</tool_call>
(API call responses. Omitted for simplicity)
All the tool calls have been made. I will wait for additional information from the user.
and return it at the same time and place, 7 days later.
<tool_call>{"name": "Get_Flight_Details", "arguments": {"token": "(omitted for simplicity)"}}</tool_call>
(API call responses. Omitted for simplicity)
<tool_call>{"name": "Search_Car_Rentals", "arguments": {"pick_up_latitude": 37.4492, "pick_up_longitude": 126.4509, "drop_off_latitude": 37.4492,
"drop_off_longitude": 126.4509, "pick_up_date": "2024-12-11", "drop_off_date": "2025-01-18", "pick_up_time": "15:00", "drop_off_time": "15:00"}}</tool_call>
(API call responses. Omitted for simplicity)
The user has provided the information. I have already made all the necessary tool calls. I am ready to generate the final response to the user.
The cheapest flight from Hangzhou to Seoul on December 10th, 2024, costs $77.44 USD. It departs from Hangzhou at 9:05 PM and arrives at Incheon
International Airport in Seoul at 1:55 PM on December 11th, 2024. The flight includes one checked bag (up to 50.7 lbs) and one carry-on bag (up to 11 lbs).
For car rental near Incheon International Airport, the cheapest option is available for pickup at 3:00 PM on December 11th, 2024, and return at the same time
and location on January 18th, 2025.

Figure 4: An example user query from ComplexFuncBench (in red), including the unspoken thinking
process (in green) and the spoken final response (in orange) from S HANKS-E2E. For each time slot
from ntchunk to (n + 1)tchunk , the chunks in green (SLM thinking chunks), blue (API call responses),
and orange (output response) happen sequentially, while the user speech chunk (in red) happens
concurrent to other blocks in the same time slot. The t = T means the time when the user’s speech
terminates.

S HANKS to call APIs while listening, and only keep the successful API calls and their responses.
When the user finishes their speech, we switch to the call-after-listening mode, where the input to the
SLM is the complete user speech. We also feed the success API calls and responses previously made
by S HANKS to the model, as if the call-after-listen model had made those API calls by itself. Based
on the full input speech and previous success API calls and responses, the model continues to make
the remaining API calls. Since some API calls have already been made by S HANKS when the user
speaks, this combined method enjoys the thinking-while-listening advantage of S HANKS.
In the last row in Table 2, we show the result of combining S HANKS-E2E with call-after-listening.
This combined method has a high number of early call accuracy while also having a higher task
success rate and response quality. Among the API calls that are successful, over 60% of API calls
are made during the user speech, while only 40% of the API calls are made after the user finishes.
This is in stark contrast to call-after-listen, where 100% of the successful API calls are made after the
user finishes, resulting in a much higher latency. As a result, the combined method only needs to
generate on average 117 tokens after the user has finished, while the call-after-listen baseline needs
to generate on average 313 tokens after the user’s turn ends. So thinking while listening reduce the
response by 62.3%.
12

Work in Progress

6

R ELATED W ORKS

Thinking before responding has been widely explored in text-only LLMs (OpenAI, 2024c; Guo
et al., 2025). Recently, this ”think then respond” paradigm has been applied to audio-aware language
models, which takes speech (or audio) as the input and output texts (Xie et al., 2025). Note that these
audio-aware language models, which only output text, are different from the speech-in-speech-out
SLMs focused on in our paper. While thinking before responding can improve the response quality
and yield significant performance on many challenging benchmarks (Lightman et al., 2024; Sakshi
et al., 2025), thinking before responding creates great response latency. As a result, it is impractical
to directly apply thinking-before-responding to SLMs, speech-in-speech-out models, which require
real-time and low-latency interaction (Li et al., 2025; Xu et al., 2025a;b). Developing reasoning
methods that preserve real-time interaction in SLMs remains an open problem.
Concurrent to us, Chiang et al. (2025) introduce thinking to SLMs by a thinking-while-speaking
method called S TITCH. S TITCH uses the fact that a chunk of audio in the speech response takes less
time to generate than it does to play to the user, and the model can use the remaining time to generate
thinking tokens when the SLM is still speaking. While both S HANKS and S TITCH explore unspoken
thinking processes for SLMs, the main distinction is when the thinking happens. In S HANKS, the
thinking process happens when the user is still speaking, while S TITCH thinks when the SLM is
speaking. In fact, the two methods can be combined: an SLM can think when listening and speaking.
We believe this will be the future of SLM, and we leave this as a promising future direction.
Another concurrent work released on arXiv less than one week ago (10/02/2025), Stream RAG (Arora
et al., 2025), also studies calling tools (web search and knowledge graph APIs) during the user’s
speech. This is similar to our second scenario introduced in Section 3.2. However, Stream RAG
focuses on when to issue retrieval/tool queries while listening and does not introduce an explicit
silent chain-of-thought (‘thinking’) process like we do. In contrast, our paper studies a broader
thinking-while-listening paradigm, with tool-calling as one application, and show benefits such as
improved user-interruption decisions.

7

C ONCLUSION , L IMITATIONS , AND F UTURE W ORK

In this paper, we introduce S HANKS, a framework that enables SLMs to think while listening.
S HANKS achieves thinking-while-listening by chunking the user input speech and progressively
reasoning over the available user inputs. When the user is speaking, S HANKS is generating thinking
chunks for all previous input speech, achieving thinking while listening. We demonstrate the potential
of S HANKS on two scenarios: First, S HANKS can listen to the user solving a math problem step-bystep, and interrupt the user when the user is making a mistake. Second, we focus on a tool-augmented
task-oriented dialogue setting and show that S HANKS can listen to the user speech and evoke necessary
API calls when the user is still speaking. On ComplexFunxBench, S HANKS successfully calls more
than half of the APIs that are required to complete the user’s request when the user is still speaking.
This reduces the response latency, as the model only needs to call the remaining half APIs after the
user has finished.
While S HANKS shows great potential in improving the user-SLM interaction, we see the following
limitations of the method. First, S HANKS requires the user’s speech to have certain structures: the
user’s speech needs to be long enough to allow the model to perform meaningful reasoning when
listening, and the information in the user’s speech needs to be able to be processed in a sequential
order. This kind of speech can naturally occur, as shown in the two scenarios we studied.
Next, S HANKS uses a fixed chunk size to segment the user input speech. The chunking nature of
S HANKS means that S HANKS always lags behind the user’s speech by tchunk seconds, incurring
latency in the thinking process. We encourage future work to reduce the latency between thinking
and listening by using more sophisticated chunking methods.
Last, the goal of the user might be unclear when the user’s speech is not completed, and the thinking
tokens generated during listening may be redundant and not always be useful to address the goal of
the user. While thinking during listening does not incur additional latency after the user’s speech
ends, S HANKS still significantly increases the compute cost during inference. Although S HANKS has
some limitations, we believe that our effort in proposing a novel modeling method, thinking while
13

Work in Progress

listening, together with the reasonable scenarios and convincing results, already contributes greatly to
the research community by shedding light on a potentially fruitful research direction.
ACKNOWLEDGMENTS
The authors would like to thank Ke-Han Lu, Chen-An Lee, Yi-Cheng Lin, and Wei-Chih Chen for
their valuable feedback on the draft of this paper.

R EFERENCES
Siddhant Arora, Haidar Khan, Kai Sun, Xin Luna Dong, Sajal Choudhary, Seungwhan Moon,
Xinyuan Zhang, Adithya Sagar, Surya Teja Appini, Kaushik Patnaik, et al. Stream rag: Instant and
accurate spoken dialogue systems with streaming tool usage. arXiv preprint arXiv:2510.02044,
2025.
Sara Bögels, Lilla Magyari, and Stephen C Levinson. Neural signatures of response planning occur
midway through an incoming question in conversation. Scientific reports, 5(1):12881, 2015.
Sara Bögels, Marisa Casillas, and Stephen C Levinson. Planning versus comprehension in turn-taking:
Fast responders show reduced anticipatory processing of the question. Neuropsychologia, 109:
295–310, 2018.
Mark Chen, Jerry Tworek, Heewoo Jun, Qiming Yuan, Henrique Ponde de Oliveira Pinto, Jared
Kaplan, Harri Edwards, Yuri Burda, Nicholas Joseph, Greg Brockman, Alex Ray, Raul Puri,
Gretchen Krueger, Michael Petrov, Heidy Khlaaf, Girish Sastry, Pamela Mishkin, Brooke Chan,
Scott Gray, Nick Ryder, Mikhail Pavlov, Alethea Power, Lukasz Kaiser, Mohammad Bavarian,
Clemens Winter, Philippe Tillet, Felipe Petroski Such, Dave Cummings, Matthias Plappert, Fotios
Chantzis, Elizabeth Barnes, Ariel Herbert-Voss, William Hebgen Guss, Alex Nichol, Alex Paino,
Nikolas Tezak, Jie Tang, Igor Babuschkin, Suchir Balaji, Shantanu Jain, William Saunders,
Christopher Hesse, Andrew N. Carr, Jan Leike, Josh Achiam, Vedant Misra, Evan Morikawa,
Alec Radford, Matthew Knight, Miles Brundage, Mira Murati, Katie Mayer, Peter Welinder, Bob
McGrew, Dario Amodei, Sam McCandlish, Ilya Sutskever, and Wojciech Zaremba. Evaluating
large language models trained on code. 2021.
Cheng-Han Chiang and Hung-yi Lee. Can large language models be an alternative to human
evaluations? In Anna Rogers, Jordan Boyd-Graber, and Naoaki Okazaki (eds.), Proceedings of the
61st Annual Meeting of the Association for Computational Linguistics (Volume 1: Long Papers),
pp. 15607–15631, Toronto, Canada, July 2023. Association for Computational Linguistics. doi:
10.18653/v1/2023.acl-long.870. URL https://aclanthology.org/2023.acl-long.
870/.
Cheng-Han Chiang, Xiaofei Wang, Linjie Li, Chung-Ching Lin, Kevin Lin, Shujie Liu, Zhendong
Wang, Zhengyuan Yang, Hung-yi Lee, and Lijuan Wang. Stitch: Simultaneous thinking and talking
with chunked reasoning for spoken language models. arXiv preprint arXiv:2507.15375, 2025.
Yunfei Chu, Jin Xu, Qian Yang, Haojie Wei, Xipin Wei, Zhifang Guo, Yichong Leng, Yuanjun Lv,
Jinzheng He, Junyang Lin, et al. Qwen2-audio technical report. arXiv preprint arXiv:2407.10759,
2024.
Karl Cobbe, Vineet Kosaraju, Mohammad Bavarian, Mark Chen, Heewoo Jun, Lukasz Kaiser,
Matthias Plappert, Jerry Tworek, Jacob Hilton, Reiichiro Nakano, et al. Training verifiers to solve
math word problems. arXiv preprint arXiv:2110.14168, 2021.
Ruth E Corps, Abigail Crossley, Chiara Gambi, and Martin J Pickering. Early preparation during
turn-taking: Listeners use content predictions to determine what to say but not when to say it.
Cognition, 175:77–95, 2018.
Alexandre Défossez, Laurent Mazaré, Manu Orsini, Amélie Royer, Patrick Pérez, Hervé Jégou,
Edouard Grave, and Neil Zeghidour. Moshi: a speech-text foundation model for real-time dialogue.
arXiv preprint arXiv:2410.00037, 2024.
14

Work in Progress

Yunfan Gao, Yun Xiong, Xinyu Gao, Kangxiang Jia, Jinliu Pan, Yuxi Bi, Yi Dai, Jiawei Sun, Meng
Wang, and Haofen Wang. Retrieval-augmented generation for large language models: A survey,
2024. URL https://arxiv.org/abs/2312.10997.
Olga Golovneva, Moya Peng Chen, Spencer Poff, Martin Corredor, Luke Zettlemoyer, Maryam
Fazel-Zarandi, and Asli Celikyilmaz. Roscoe: A suite of metrics for scoring step-by-step reasoning.
In The Eleventh International Conference on Learning Representations, 2023.
Aaron Grattafiori, Abhimanyu Dubey, Abhinav Jauhri, Abhinav Pandey, Abhishek Kadian, Ahmad
Al-Dahle, Aiesha Letman, Akhil Mathur, Alan Schelten, Alex Vaughan, et al. The llama 3 herd of
models. arXiv preprint arXiv:2407.21783, 2024.
Daya Guo, Dejian Yang, Haowei Zhang, Junxiao Song, Ruoyu Zhang, Runxin Xu, Qihao Zhu,
Shirong Ma, Peiyi Wang, Xiao Bi, et al. Deepseek-r1: Incentivizing reasoning capability in llms
via reinforcement learning. arXiv preprint arXiv:2501.12948, 2025.
Edward J Hu, yelong shen, Phillip Wallis, Zeyuan Allen-Zhu, Yuanzhi Li, Shean Wang, Lu Wang,
and Weizhu Chen. LoRA: Low-rank adaptation of large language models. In International
Conference on Learning Representations, 2022. URL https://openreview.net/forum?
id=nZeVKeeFYf9.
Takeshi Kojima, Shixiang Shane Gu, Machel Reid, Yutaka Matsuo, and Yusuke Iwasawa. Large
language models are zero-shot reasoners. Advances in neural information processing systems, 35:
22199–22213, 2022.
Nathan Lambert, Jacob Morrison, Valentina Pyatkin, Shengyi Huang, Hamish Ivison, Faeze Brahman,
Lester James V Miranda, Alisa Liu, Nouha Dziri, Shane Lyu, et al. Tulu 3: Pushing frontiers in
open language model post-training. arXiv preprint arXiv:2411.15124, 2024.
Yaniv Leviathan, Matan Kalman, and Yossi Matias. Fast inference from transformers via speculative
decoding. In International Conference on Machine Learning, pp. 19274–19286. PMLR, 2023.
Quentin Lhoest, Albert Villanova del Moral, Yacine Jernite, Abhishek Thakur, Patrick von Platen,
Suraj Patil, Julien Chaumond, Mariama Drame, Julien Plu, Lewis Tunstall, Joe Davison, Mario
Šaško, Gunjan Chhablani, Bhavitvya Malik, Simon Brandeis, Teven Le Scao, Victor Sanh, Canwen
Xu, Nicolas Patry, Angelina McMillan-Major, Philipp Schmid, Sylvain Gugger, Clément Delangue,
Théo Matussière, Lysandre Debut, Stas Bekman, Pierric Cistac, Thibault Goehringer, Victor Mustar,
François Lagunas, Alexander Rush, and Thomas Wolf. Datasets: A community library for natural
language processing. In Heike Adel and Shuming Shi (eds.), Proceedings of the 2021 Conference
on Empirical Methods in Natural Language Processing: System Demonstrations, pp. 175–184,
Online and Punta Cana, Dominican Republic, November 2021. Association for Computational
Linguistics. doi: 10.18653/v1/2021.emnlp-demo.21. URL https://aclanthology.org/
2021.emnlp-demo.21/.
Tianpeng Li, Jun Liu, Tao Zhang, Yuanbo Fang, Da Pan, Mingrui Wang, Zheng Liang, Zehuan Li,
Mingan Lin, Guosheng Dong, et al. Baichuan-audio: A unified framework for end-to-end speech
interaction. arXiv preprint arXiv:2502.17239, 2025.
Hunter Lightman, Vineet Kosaraju, Yuri Burda, Harrison Edwards, Bowen Baker, Teddy Lee, Jan
Leike, John Schulman, Ilya Sutskever, and Karl Cobbe. Let’s verify step by step. In The Twelfth
International Conference on Learning Representations, 2024. URL https://openreview.
net/forum?id=v8L0pN6EOi.
Guan-Ting Lin, Jiachen Lian, Tingle Li, Qirui Wang, Gopala Anumanchipalli, Alexander H. Liu, and
Hung yi Lee. Full-duplex-bench: A benchmark to evaluate full-duplex spoken dialogue models on
turn-taking capabilities, 2025. URL https://arxiv.org/abs/2503.04721.
Ilya Loshchilov and Frank Hutter. SGDR: Stochastic gradient descent with warm restarts. In
International Conference on Learning Representations, 2017. URL https://openreview.
net/forum?id=Skq89Scxx.
15

Work in Progress

Hongyin Luo, Tianhua Zhang, Yung-Sung Chuang, Yuan Gong, Yoon Kim, Xixin Wu, Helen
Meng, and James Glass. Search augmented instruction learning. In Houda Bouamor, Juan
Pino, and Kalika Bali (eds.), Findings of the Association for Computational Linguistics: EMNLP
2023, pp. 3717–3729, Singapore, December 2023. Association for Computational Linguistics.
doi: 10.18653/v1/2023.findings-emnlp.242. URL https://aclanthology.org/2023.
findings-emnlp.242/.
OpenAI. Introducing next-generation audio models in the api, 2024a. URL https://openai.
com/index/introducing-our-next-generation-audio-models/. Accessed on
May 12, 2025.
OpenAI. Hello gpt-4o, 2024b. URL https://openai.com/index/hello-gpt-4o/. Accessed on May 12, 2025.
OpenAI. Learning to reason with llms, 2024c. URL https://openai.com/index/
learning-to-reason-with-llms/. Accessed on July 15, 2025.
Yujia Qin, Shengding Hu, Yankai Lin, Weize Chen, Ning Ding, Ganqu Cui, Zheni Zeng, Yufei Huang,
Chaojun Xiao, Chi Han, Yi Ren Fung, Yusheng Su, Huadong Wang, Cheng Qian, Runchu Tian,
Kunlun Zhu, Shihao Liang, Xingyu Shen, Bokai Xu, Zhen Zhang, Yining Ye, Bowen Li, Ziwei
Tang, Jing Yi, Yuzhang Zhu, Zhenning Dai, Lan Yan, Xin Cong, Yaxi Lu, Weilin Zhao, Yuxiang
Huang, Junxi Yan, Xu Han, Xian Sun, Dahai Li, Jason Phang, Cheng Yang, Tongshuang Wu,
Heng Ji, Zhiyuan Liu, and Maosong Sun. Tool learning with foundation models, 2024a. URL
https://arxiv.org/abs/2304.08354.
Yujia Qin, Shihao Liang, Yining Ye, Kunlun Zhu, Lan Yan, Yaxi Lu, Yankai Lin, Xin Cong, Xiangru
Tang, Bill Qian, Sihan Zhao, Lauren Hong, Runchu Tian, Ruobing Xie, Jie Zhou, Mark Gerstein,
dahai li, Zhiyuan Liu, and Maosong Sun. ToolLLM: Facilitating large language models to master
16000+ real-world APIs. In The Twelfth International Conference on Learning Representations,
2024b. URL https://openreview.net/forum?id=dHng2O0Jjr.
Qwen, :, An Yang, Baosong Yang, Beichen Zhang, Binyuan Hui, Bo Zheng, Bowen Yu, Chengyuan
Li, Dayiheng Liu, Fei Huang, Haoran Wei, Huan Lin, Jian Yang, Jianhong Tu, Jianwei Zhang,
Jianxin Yang, Jiaxi Yang, Jingren Zhou, Junyang Lin, Kai Dang, Keming Lu, Keqin Bao, Kexin
Yang, Le Yu, Mei Li, Mingfeng Xue, Pei Zhang, Qin Zhu, Rui Men, Runji Lin, Tianhao Li, Tianyi
Tang, Tingyu Xia, Xingzhang Ren, Xuancheng Ren, Yang Fan, Yang Su, Yichang Zhang, Yu Wan,
Yuqiong Liu, Zeyu Cui, Zhenru Zhang, and Zihan Qiu. Qwen2.5 technical report, 2025. URL
https://arxiv.org/abs/2412.15115.
Alec Radford, Jong Wook Kim, Tao Xu, Greg Brockman, Christine McLeavey, and Ilya Sutskever.
Robust speech recognition via large-scale weak supervision, 2022. URL https://arxiv.
org/abs/2212.04356.
Alec Radford, Jong Wook Kim, Tao Xu, Greg Brockman, Christine McLeavey, and Ilya Sutskever.
Robust speech recognition via large-scale weak supervision. In International conference on
machine learning, pp. 28492–28518. PMLR, 2023.
David Rein, Betty Li Hou, Asa Cooper Stickland, Jackson Petty, Richard Yuanzhe Pang, Julien
Dirani, Julian Michael, and Samuel R. Bowman. GPQA: A graduate-level google-proof q&a
benchmark. In First Conference on Language Modeling, 2024. URL https://openreview.
net/forum?id=Ti67584b98.
S Sakshi, Utkarsh Tyagi, Sonal Kumar, Ashish Seth, Ramaneswaran Selvakumar, Oriol Nieto,
Ramani Duraiswami, Sreyan Ghosh, and Dinesh Manocha. MMAU: A massive multi-task audio
understanding and reasoning benchmark. In The Thirteenth International Conference on Learning
Representations, 2025. URL https://openreview.net/forum?id=TeVAZXr3yv.
Timo Schick, Jane Dwivedi-Yu, Roberto Dessi, Roberta Raileanu, Maria Lomeli, Eric Hambro, Luke
Zettlemoyer, Nicola Cancedda, and Thomas Scialom. Toolformer: Language models can teach
themselves to use tools. In Thirty-seventh Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems,
2023. URL https://openreview.net/forum?id=Yacmpz84TH.
16

Work in Progress

Hugo Touvron, Louis Martin, Kevin Stone, Peter Albert, Amjad Almahairi, Yasmine Babaei, Nikolay
Bashlykov, Soumya Batra, Prajjwal Bhargava, Shruti Bhosale, et al. Llama 2: Open foundation
and fine-tuned chat models. arXiv preprint arXiv:2307.09288, 2023.
Lei Wang, Wanyu Xu, Yihuai Lan, Zhiqiang Hu, Yunshi Lan, Roy Ka-Wei Lee, and Ee-Peng Lim.
Plan-and-solve prompting: Improving zero-shot chain-of-thought reasoning by large language
models. In Anna Rogers, Jordan Boyd-Graber, and Naoaki Okazaki (eds.), Proceedings of the
61st Annual Meeting of the Association for Computational Linguistics (Volume 1: Long Papers),
pp. 2609–2634, Toronto, Canada, July 2023. Association for Computational Linguistics. doi:
10.18653/v1/2023.acl-long.147. URL https://aclanthology.org/2023.acl-long.
147/.
Mingqiu Wang, Izhak Shafran, Hagen Soltau, Wei Han, Yuan Cao, Dian Yu, and Laurent El Shafey.
Retrieval augmented end-to-end spoken dialog models. In ICASSP 2024-2024 IEEE International
Conference on Acoustics, Speech and Signal Processing (ICASSP), pp. 12056–12060. IEEE, 2024.
Jason Wei, Xuezhi Wang, Dale Schuurmans, Maarten Bosma, Fei Xia, Ed Chi, Quoc V Le, Denny
Zhou, et al. Chain-of-thought prompting elicits reasoning in large language models. Advances in
neural information processing systems, 35:24824–24837, 2022.
Zhifei Xie, Mingbao Lin, Zihang Liu, Pengcheng Wu, Shuicheng Yan, and Chunyan Miao. Audioreasoner: Improving reasoning capability in large audio language models. arXiv preprint
arXiv:2503.02318, 2025.
Jin Xu, Zhifang Guo, Jinzheng He, Hangrui Hu, Ting He, Shuai Bai, Keqin Chen, Jialin Wang, Yang
Fan, Kai Dang, et al. Qwen2. 5-omni technical report. arXiv preprint arXiv:2503.20215, 2025a.
Jin Xu, Zhifang Guo, Hangrui Hu, Yunfei Chu, Xiong Wang, Jinzheng He, Yuxuan Wang, Xian Shi,
Ting He, Xinfa Zhu, et al. Qwen3-omni technical report. arXiv preprint arXiv:2509.17765, 2025b.
Weilin Zhao, Yuxiang Huang, Xu Han, Wang Xu, Chaojun Xiao, Xinrong Zhang, Yewei Fang,
Kaihuo Zhang, Zhiyuan Liu, and Maosong Sun. Ouroboros: Generating longer drafts phrase
by phrase for faster speculative decoding. In Yaser Al-Onaizan, Mohit Bansal, and YunNung Chen (eds.), Proceedings of the 2024 Conference on Empirical Methods in Natural
Language Processing, pp. 13378–13393, Miami, Florida, USA, November 2024. Association for Computational Linguistics. doi: 10.18653/v1/2024.emnlp-main.742. URL https:
//aclanthology.org/2024.emnlp-main.742/.
Lianmin Zheng, Wei-Lin Chiang, Ying Sheng, Siyuan Zhuang, Zhanghao Wu, Yonghao Zhuang,
Zi Lin, Zhuohan Li, Dacheng Li, Eric Xing, et al. Judging llm-as-a-judge with mt-bench and
chatbot arena. Advances in neural information processing systems, 36:46595–46623, 2023.
Yaowei Zheng, Richong Zhang, Junhao Zhang, Yanhan Ye, and Zheyan Luo. LlamaFactory:
Unified efficient fine-tuning of 100+ language models. In Yixin Cao, Yang Feng, and Deyi
Xiong (eds.), Proceedings of the 62nd Annual Meeting of the Association for Computational
Linguistics (Volume 3: System Demonstrations), pp. 400–410, Bangkok, Thailand, August
2024. Association for Computational Linguistics. doi: 10.18653/v1/2024.acl-demos.38. URL
https://aclanthology.org/2024.acl-demos.38/.
Lucen Zhong, Zhengxiao Du, Xiaohan Zhang, Haiyi Hu, and Jie Tang. Complexfuncbench: exploring multi-step and constrained function calling under long-context scenario. arXiv preprint
arXiv:2501.10132, 2025.

A

E NCODING THE U SER S PEECH

In the main content of the paper, we say that we chunk the user input audio into fixed-size chunks
of tchunk seconds. In fact, what we do is chunking at the level of feature representation instead of
the level of the audio waveform. Precisely, when encoding the i ≥ 2 speech chunks Si , we feed the
full speech through the audio encoder, and only take the speech representation for the corresponding
speech chunk. If we directly chunk the audio waveform and encode each audio chunk independently,
the representation of later audio chunks will not be able to depend on the earlier audio chunks, which
can potentially lead to performance degradation.
17

Work in Progress

B

D ETAILS IN T RAINING

We fine-tune the models using the Llamafactory (Zheng et al., 2024) toolkit. When generating the
training data using GPT-4o, we do not feed the audio of the user’s speech into GPT-4o. Instead, we
feed the transcription of the speech chunks. This is because using the speech chunk will increase
the cost and time to call the API. To obtain the transcription of each chunk, we use Whisper-largev3 (Radford et al., 2023) to obtain the transcription and timestamp for each word in the user speech,
and then segment the transcriptions into chunks based on the timestamp. While the timestamp
obtained from Whisper may not be very precise, this is already sufficient for preparing the training
data.
B.1

F INE - TUNING FOR I NTERRUPTION

To prepare the training data, we randomly sample 5K samples from Tulu-3-SFT-Math-Grade (Lambert
et al., 2024), which can be loaded from Huggingface datasets (Lhoest et al., 2021): https://
huggingface.co/datasets/allenai/tulu-3-sft-personas-math-grade. We
follow the procedure detailed in Section 3.1.2 to construct the training data. We additionally filter out
audios that are longer than 80 seconds, so the final training dataset is slightly less than 5K.
We fine-tune the thinker on the training data for two epochs on 8 A100 GPUs. The effective batch
size is 64. We set the learning rate to 1.0e − 4 with cosine learning rate scheduling and a 0.1 warm-up
ratio (Loshchilov & Hutter, 2017). The same training hyperparameters are used across all three
models, including the S HANKS-E2E, S HANKS-Cascade, and no-thinking model.
The training data is mostly generated by GPT-4o. We include the prompts to generate the reasoning
chunks in Table 3 and 4, the prompt to generate the interruption in Table 5, and the prompt to generate
the response without interruption in Table 6.
B.2

F INE - TUNING FOR T OOL C ALLS

We use the procedure detailed in Section 3.2.2 to construct the training data. The training data consists
of 500 samples. The prompt used to determine when an API call can be made is shown in Table 8.
The prompt used to generate the final response is shown in Table 9.
For the think-after-listen and S HANKS-E2E model, we fine-tune them using LoRA (Hu et al., 2022),
as the sequence length for this dataset is very large and full fine-tuning will result in out-of-memory.
We also fine-tune the LM head and the token embedding of the talker model; otherwise, the model
will not be able to recognize and generate special tokens. For the S HANKS-Cascade model, we
fine-tune all the parameters. As the training dataset is smaller, we fine-tune the model for 10 epochs,
while other training hyperparameters follow those in Appendix B.1.

C

D ETAILS IN E VALUATION

C.1

E VALUATION D ETAILS FOR I NTERRUPTION

To determine the time of interruption tinterrupt when evaluating the interrupt latency, we apply the
following procedure. We use Whisper-large (Radford et al., 2022) to obtain the timestamp of each
word in the user speech from the testing set, and we use GPT-4o to determine when the first error in
the user speech occurs by giving GPT-4o the question, the ground truth answer, the transcription of
the user speech, and the word-timestamp alignment. The prompt used to determine the first error
time terror is shown in Table 7.
To evaluate the valid interrupt ratio, we use GPT-4o as the judge. The prompt used to determine
whether an interruption is valid is shown in Table 10.
C.2

E VALUATION D ETAILS FOR T OOL C ALL

When evaluating the S HANKS models, when the user is still speaking, each thinking chunk can only
include at most 320 tokens generated by the SLM itself. In some cases, the API call augments may
include very long tokens, which can easily exceed the token limit for the thinking chunk, and the
18

Work in Progress

API call will be incomplete and unsuccessful. While we do not specifically handle this kind of case,
there is a simple workaround that can resolve the above issue: The long arguments for the API call
generated by the model must be the returned value of previous tool calls, so we can include previous
API call responses in a reservoir of the draft for speculative decoding (Leviathan et al., 2023; Zhao
et al., 2024), and use speculative decoding to speed up the inference speed.
ComplexFuncBench is originally designed to evaluate a model’s ability to parse long-context information, and the API call response can be very long. However, since Qwen-omni only has a context
length of 32,768, once the token exceeds this limit, we directly terminate the inference for a tested
instance. As a result, some of the testing samples we evaluate may fail because the number of tokens
exceeds the max sequence length of the model.

1000

Count

800
600
400
200
0

60

40

20

0

Interruption Latency

20

40

Figure 5: The interruption latency for S HANKS. The bars in red are the results on the wrong subset,
while the bars in green are the results on the correct subset. One can observe that the red bars are
mostly positive, meaning that the model tends to interrupt after the first error occurs.

19

Work in Progress

# Generate Internal Thinking While Listening
## Task Introduction
Humans are capable of thinking while listening to others speak. Based on the partial information received, we parse important
details, clarify ambiguities, recall relevant facts, and compute intermediate variables. Your task is to simulate this
process. You will be the previous chunks of user’s speech in text, and you will also see your previous inner thinking when
listening to those chunks. Your job is to generate the next internal thinking as if you had listened up to the newest chunk.
When generating internal thinking spans, follow these guidelines:
1. The inner thinking span should be fewer than 400 words.
2. Your internal thinking should reflect the user’s emotion, intent, and what you already know from the user. If any
relevant information can be recalled or intermediate variables can be calculated based on current information, include them
in your inner thinking.
3. The inner thinking should read more like full, coherent sentences rather than shorthand notes. Using short notes will be
very hard to understand and possibly making logical errors.
4. If the user’s query involves a question, you **must generate your own step-by-step answer in the internal thinking before
the user finishes speaking**.
5. Later internal thinking spans must not repeat information already covered in earlier ones. However, if later
transcription spans update or contradict earlier information, explicitly point that out and correct it. You may start with
phrases like \Wait, the user previously..., but now...".
6. Always think independently in your internal thinking. When the user is providing there solution, you should have you own
solution and then compare your own solution with the user’s solution. If you identify any error, you should interrupt the
user immediately. Indicate the interruption by ending your internal thinking with the special token [INTERRUPT].
--## Samples
### Example 1:
User (partial) input transcription 1
Betty is saving money for a new wallet which
Prior Inner Thinking 1
The user’s tone is neutral. The user describes a situation where someone named Betty is saving money for a new wallet.
user hasn’t finished yet. Perhaps they want me to give advice on how to save money.

The

User (partial) input transcription 2
costs $100. Betty has only half of the money she needs.
Prior Inner Thinking 2
Now the user gives more information. We know the wallet Betty wants to buy costs $100, and she has only half of that.
calculate this: $100 / 2 = $50, so she currently has $50. The user’s intent is still unclear.

I can

User (partial) input transcription 3
Her parents decided to give her $15 for that
Inner thinking to Generate
Well, it seems that Betty’s parents will contribute as well. She will get $15 from them. Now she has $50 + $15 = $65.
still needs $100 - $65 = $35. It seems the user wants to know how to plan Betty’s budget.
### Example 2:
User (partial) input transcription 1
I want to answer the following math question:

She

Is the function f(x) =

Prior Inner Thinking 1
The user uses a neutral tone and describes a math question they want to solve. I will try to solve the question when the user
is speaking. I can verify if the user’s solution is correct by comparing my solution with the user’s solution. The question
is about a function in x. The user has not finished yet. I will wait until they complete the question.
User (partial) input transcription 2
4xˆ2 + 4x + 1 always above the x axis?
Prior Inner Thinking 2
The user has finished describing the question. They want to determine if the function f(x) = 4xˆ2 + 4x + 1 is always above
the x-axis. I am ready to answer this question. Let’s compute the discriminant: D = bˆ2 - 4ac = 4ˆ2 - 4 * 4 * 1 = 16 16 = 0. The function touches the x-axis at one point. I have the solution. Since the user wants to solve the question
by themselves, I will not interrupt the user and listen to the solution. However, I will interrupt the use if there is any
mistakes.
User (partial) input transcription 3
Here is my solution: Based on the formula D = bˆ2 - 2ac,
Inner thinking to Generate
Now I see that the user wants to solve the question themselves. I should verify whether their solution is correct. The user
says the formula is D = bˆ2 - 2ac, but that’s incorrect. The correct formula is D = bˆ2 - 4ac. The user has made a mistake,
and I need to interrupt them. [INTERRUPT]

Table 3: Prompt for generating the thinking chunks in the training data for the interruption experiment
(part 1).

20

Work in Progress

### Example 3:
User (partial) input transcription 1
Bella bought stamps at the post office.

Some of the

Prior Inner Thinking 1
The user uses a neutral tone and describes a math question he wants to solve. The
question is to The user is introducing a word problem involving someone named Bella
and her purchase of stamps. It seems like a math problem, likely about counting.
The exact numbers and relationships haven’t been shared yet. I will hold off making
any calculations until I know more about the stamps.
User (partial) input transcription 2
stamps had a snowflake design, some had a truck design,
Prior Inner Thinking 2
We now know there several types of stamps: snowflake and truck. There seems to
be more, but the user is still speaking. There are still no numbers provided, so I
can’t compute yet. I will wait for more information.
User (partial) input transcription 3
and some had a rose design. Bella bought 11
Prior Inner Thinking 3
Now we know that there are three types of stamps: snowflake, truck, and rose.
Bella bought 11, but it is unclear which this number corresponds to. I will wait
for the complete detail from the user to be sure before computing.
User (partial) input transcription 4
snowflake stamps. She bought 9 more truck stamps
Prior Inner Thinking 4
Now I know that Bella bought 11 snowflake stamps. I am also told she bought 9 more
truck stamps than snowflake stamps. I can calculate the number first: she bought
11 + 9 = 20 truck stamps. The information we have now is:
- Snowflake: 11
- Truck: 20
The user is still talking, and I am waiting for more information.
User (partial) input transcription 5
than snowflake stamps, and 13 fewer rose stamps than
Prior Inner Thinking 5
Now the user states that Bella bought 13 fewer roses than something, but it is
unclear what is compared here. I will wait until the user finishes.
User (partial) input transcription 6
truck stamps. How many stamps did Bella buy in all?
Inner thinking to Generate
Now I know that Bella bought 13 fewer roses than the truck stamps. There are 20
truck stamps, so I can calculate the number of rose stamp is 20 - 13 = 7. The user
finishes with a question: total number of stamps. I already have all counts:
- Snowflake: 11
- Truck: 20
- Rose: 7
Total = 11 + 20 + 7 = 38 stamps. I have the answer and I can provide it to the
user.
--This is the end of the examples. Now, this is the (partial) user input
transcription, and you need to generate a inner thinking. You do not need to
explain why the inner thinking you generate is a good one. Simply generate a good
one without explaining it.
{interleaved transcription and thinking}
Inner thinking to generate (Do not generate anything else other than the inner
thinking)

Table 4: Prompt for generating the thinking chunks in the training data for the interruption experiment
(part 2).

21

Work in Progress

# Task:

Interrupt the user to correct an error

A user is talking to an AI assistant. You will be given a partial user turn. There is an error in the user turn and the AI
assistant has identified that error. The AI assistant needs to interrupt the user.
Your job is to generate the response for the AI assistant that interrupts the user’s turn. You will be given:
(1) A (possibly incomplete) user turn
(2) The inner thinking of the AI assistant. This inner thinking hasn’t been spoken out by the AI assistant and is only
silently kept in the assistant’s mind. We provide you this inner thinking for you to better craft a response.
When correcting and interrupting the user, be precise about what the error is and how to correct it. You only need to
generate the response without saying anything else. The conversation between the user and the assistant is in spoken form,
so you need to make your response easy to be spoken while not overly informal and colloquial.
## Example
#### User (partial) input
I want to answer the following math question: Is the function f(x) = 4xˆ2 + 4x + 1 always above the x axis?
solution: Based on the formula D = bˆ2 - 2ac, D = 4ˆ2 - 2 * 4 * 1 = 8 > 0

Here is my

#### Inner thinking of the assistant
The user uses a neutral tone and describes a math question he wants to solve. The question is to determine if a 2-degree
function is above the x-axis. f(x) = 4xˆ2 + 4x + 1. Let’s use D = bˆ2 - 4ac = 4ˆ2 - 4 * 4 * 1 = 0. So the function happens
to intersect with x-axis at one point. I can answer the user if the user wants me to do so.
But wait, the user themselves want to solve the question, and the user says D = bˆ2 - 2ac, which is clearly wrong. The
correct formula should be D = bˆ2 - 4ac. I should interupt the user here and tell them the correct formula with a friendly
and reminding tone.
#### Assistant Response
Wait, I think the correct formula should be bˆ2 - 4ac, not bˆ2 - 2ac.

The coefficient you mentioned was wrong.

## Now it is your turn
#### User (partial) input
{query}
#### Inner thinking of the assistant
{inner thinking}
#### Assistant Response
<Write the interrupting response here.
not include anything else.>

Be precise about the error and the correction; keep it concise and easy to speak.

Do

Table 5: Prompts for generating an interrupting correction response.

# Task: Generate the spoken response given full user turn and assistant’s inner
thinking
A user is chatting with a voice assistant. Your job is to act as the voice
assistant and generate a valid response that fits in the context. You will be
given:
(1) The full user turn
(2) The inner thinking of the voice assistant. Note that the voice assistant may
generate the inner thinking when the user hasn’t finished, so it is possible that
some contents in the inner thinking is incorrect.
Guidelines:
1. Do not generate anything else except the response.
2. The inner thinking might mention a drafted response. If the drafted response is
still valid considering the full user turn, follow the draft and start the response.
If the draft is invalid considering the full user input, neglect the draft and craft
a response that is suitable.
3. This is a spoken dialogue. Keep the response easy to follow for spoken form.
However, there is no need to deliberately use very colloquial words or phrasing,
making things awkward.
## Input
#### Full user input
{query}
#### Inner thinking of the voice assistant
{inner thinking}
#### Your Response (Act like the voice assistant)
<Write only the final spoken response here>

Table 6: Prompts for generating the response for the interruption application.

22

Work in Progress

# Task:

Detect the first reasoning or calculation error with timestamps

You a user’s query. In the user query, the user describes a math problem and
then attempt to solve the problem by themselves. This user query is in a spoken
form, and I provide you with the transcription. I will also provide you the force
alignment result of the transcription, which corresponds timestamp of each word in
the spoken response.
Your job is to determine where the problem solving process has the first calcaultion
or reasoning error. In your response, you should solve the math problem by
yourself, and carefully check the spoken response. When you see the first error
in the spoken response, use the provided timestamp to determine when the first
error happened. Conclude you respond with: "First error: [time]", where ’time’
is the time where the first error happens. If the user’s problem solving process is
completely correct, please use -1 to indicate that there is no error, i.e., "First
error: -1"
## Example
### User Query
I want to solve the following math question: Natalia sold clips to 48 of her
friends in April, and then she sold half as many clips in May. How many clips did
Natalia sell altogether in April and May? Here is my solution: Our goal is to
calculate the total number of clips sold in April and May. In April, she sold 48.
In May, she sold the half of that, which is 96. So she sold 48 in April plus 96 in
May, making it 144 in total.
### Word-Timestamp
I - 0.00
want - 0.50
...
96. - 36.50
...
total. - 44.00
### Correct Answer
72
### Output
The math problem wants to know how many clips Natalia sold in total. In April, she
sold 48. In May, she sold half as many, so she sold 48 / 2 = 24. In total, she
sold 48 + 24 = 72. In the problem solving process, the user says that ’half of
that, which is 96.’ This is incorrect. The correct number for May should be 24.
This is where the first error occurs. Based on the Word-Timestamp information, the
word 96 is emitted at second.
First error: 36.50
## Now, it is your turn.
### User Query
{question}
### Word-Timestamp
{alignment}
### Correct Answer
{answer}
### Output
<Write the reasoning here and conclude with "First error:

[time]">

Table 7: Template for detecting the first error in the interruption task.

23

Work in Progress

# Task:

Earliest possible time to call tools during a spoken user query

You are given a user spoken query, which requires some tool usage for answering.
You will be given the tool calls (including their parameters) which are useful for
responding to the user query. You will also be given the timestamp of each word in
the user’s utterance. Your job is to determine the earliest time that a tool call
can be called when the user is speaking. That is, when the user is still speaking,
the information that has been spoken by the user may already be sufficient enough
to call some of the tools. Your job is to determine the **earliest time** during
the utterance that a tool call can be called. A tool can be called if only if it is
clear what tool should be call and what the paramaters are for the tool call.
### User Spoken Query
{question}
### Time Stamp of Each word
{alignment}
### Tools that needs to be called
{tools}
### Total number of tool calls
{count}
### Output Format
Your response should be a python dictionary. The key of this dictionary is an
integer index of the tool call shown above, and the value is the earliest time the
tool can be called. Your response should only include a python dictionary. The
first character in your response should be the left bracket while the last character
in your response should be the right bracket. Your response should be able to be
directly converted into a python dictionary using eval(). If there are N tools that
need to be called, your output dictionary should have N items. I also provide you
the number of tool calls, so you should verify if your output dictionary matches the
number of tool calls.
### Your response:
<Return only a python dictionary, e.g., {0:

12.5, 1:

18.0}>

Table 8: Template for checking the earliest callable time for an API.

# Task:

Generate the final user-facing response from tool call results

You will be given a user query. The user query can only be responded based on
the results of some external tool call. I will show you the tool calls and call
responses. Your task is to generate a final response to the user based on the tool
call results. The final response to the user should satisfy the user’s original
query and omit unnecessary information. Some intermediate processes in the tool
call may simply be some process to resolve the variables, and they are not necessary
to be included in the final response to the user.
### User Query
{transcription}
### Previous API Calls
{previous tool calls}
### Response to the User Query (Only provide the response. Do not include anything
else.)
<Write only the final user-facing response here, distilled from the tool results and
satisfying the query. Exclude setup steps and variable-resolution details.>

Table 9: Prompts for generating a final response O in the API call application.

24

Work in Progress

# Task:

Judge if the assistant’s interruption is reasonable

A user is speaking to a voice assistant. When the user is speaking, the assistant
tries to interrupt the user. Your job is to judge if the assistant is interrupting
the user in a reasonable way. A reasonable interruption is when the user says
something wrong and ambiguous, and the assistant is trying to help correct or
clarify the user’s statement.
Here is the user’s speech before the assistant interrupted:
{user speech before interrupt}
Here is the assistant’s speech that attempts to interrupt the user:
{assistant speech after interrupt}
Please judge if the assistant is interrupting the user in a reasonable way. If the
assistant is interrupting the user in a reasonable way, return "yes". Otherwise,
return "no". Please provide some explanation for your judgment and conclude with
"Final verdict: Yes/No". A valid interruption is when the user is indeed making a
mistake and the assistant is trying to help correct or clarify the user’s statement.
### Output
<Write your explanation here.
verdict: No">

Conclude with "Final verdict:

Yes" or "Final

Table 10: The prompt used for judging whether an interruption is reasonable.

25

